We're all here to reflect, remember, and practice together. So that's a beautiful, precious
opportunity.
And as usual, every time we begin, what makes all the difference in every moment for where
we move from here is connecting with our motivation. So again, as usual, before practicing, before
studying, reflecting, just really tuning in with our beautiful motivation, our joy, appreciation,
for this precious, fleeting moment, and that we're aspiring with really vast, beautiful
Bodhichitta that this time together, and really every moment of our lives now and in the future,
can truly be of great benefit to all the limitless sentient beings, and that we can all swiftly
attain the ultimate realization of Bodhichitta, which is the Buddhahood.
[silence]
And so as we're practicing, again, within the frame of our Ngondro, we're always connecting
with what is the aim of our practice. And really, the aim in this context is to absorb
the beautiful teachings of the Buddha into our mind and heart and realize them. And the
essence of that is really training our minds in the great, beautiful Bodhichitta, the thought
of enlightenment, a heart of warmth, openness, tenderness, intelligence, and great confidence
in the goodness nature of ourselves and all beings, and openness to understanding all
the myriad ways. And so within our Dharma practice of revealing the nature of our mind,
which is the thing through which we experience everything, we have our formal practice, which
gives a nice frame, a nice little vessel that we can always keep a continuum of touching
the home base and reflecting upon all the teachings we've heard and the experiences
we have had to continue and touch home base. And so within the framework of our practice,
we all know I'm just reviewing what's always essential. And of course, this is all from
my own little mind, but we all, each one of you, has your own understanding of the Dharma
and own way of hearing the teachings. And so just please keep that in mind.
So always when we're beginning, we have what we're called the three frames, right? Begin
good in the beginning, we're really connecting with our motivation of our joy, devotion,
contentment of the situation, early looking, reflecting on the four thoughts, as we'll
do on how precious this life is, on impermanence, on the law of cause and effect, and of all
samsara and all of its challenges and sufferings. And along with the four basic teachings of
the Buddha, the four noble truths, so reflecting on samsara and its causes, and then recognizing
the deeper teachings of the Buddha, that beyond samsara, pervading samsara is the essential
nature beyond suffering. When we don't have a misunderstanding or misapprehension of the
nature how it is, then we see things more clearly how they are, and that's called the
truth of cessation, the cessation of suffering, removal of our obscurations and our confused
behavior that creates more obscurations and trouble for ourselves and others. And then
there's the cause of revealing the causes for removing our obscurations increasing of
our positive qualities of wisdom and compassion, which is the path of Dharma, and reflecting
on the beautiful qualities and abilities of the Dharma, which are known classically as
the Three Jewels. And we've been spending the last few sessions a little bit with reflecting
on the aspect of our nundra practice, of our foundational practices, on the section of refuge
within nundra. And I think it's important to remember that just like our nundra practice
isn't something we run through and then leave behind us either in the day or with the accumulation
of practices. Similarly, with each section within our nundra, we're adding, we're letting
our minds reflect and focus on another aspect of what our practice is. Does that make sense?
So we're not just doing... Like refuge is not separate from bodhicitta, the five main
sections in our... I know there's some people who are just tuning in coming today. So there's
these five main sections of these essential practices. First, there's the outer, which
we just talked about, the four thoughts that turn the mind. And then we have our refuge
practice, which is the essence of refuges, our confidence, our faith, our devotion in
the three jewels in the Buddha Dharma Sangha. And then generating bodhicitta is the second,
generating a mind of loving kindness and openness to be of true benefit from now for all beings
forever. And then generating, accumulating our merit, accumulating positive frame of
mind and actions that follow through with that. So with the skillful means of offering
the mandala to the three jewels, offering everything within the experience of this life
and all future lives to the goodness and positive victory of the glory of the three jewels shining
in the minds and hearts of all beings. And then removing our obscurations through the
very skillful means practice of our Vajrasattva practice, this is the fourth. And then mingling
our mind with the enlightened mind of the guru, of guru yoga, mingling our mind with
joy and devotion again and again with the heart of awareness, the mind of enlightenment,
the fully ripened mind of the Buddha, of our precious teacher, is the fifth. And so what
I'm getting at is with refuge, we're touching home, but it's not separate from any of the
others. And likewise, when we move to bodhicitta, we still have our refuge and bodhicitta. So
the emphasis of each one might be slightly different. I think we all know this, but I'm
just saying, again, remembering that is helpful. That's really the essence of all the Buddha's
teachings and practices, looking at what's true, as well as examining what's not true,
finding out for ourselves. So once we get to refuge, we have just the basic chant we
have with Guru Padmasambhava before us, and all the objects of refuge in the refuge tree,
with all limitless sentient beings before us, in front of us, all witnessing the glory of
Padmasambhava. And then our mother and father of this life, together with all beings before
them, reflecting on the beautiful qualities and powers of the three jewels. Then we're
taking refuge with our bodhicitta. So from now until attaining the heart of enlightenment,
we take refuge in the Buddha. Dharma, the Sangha, embodied as Guru Padmasambhava. And like we
talked a little bit in the last bit, you know, the essence of refuge is really, as we reflect
on the qualities of the Buddha, the qualities of the Dharma, the qualities of the Sangha,
different levels of meaning of what are the Buddha, what is a Buddha, what is the Dharma,
what is the Sangha. The more we practice, then we explore, we see, you know, our interest is fed,
both through what we hear and being able to apply the practice in our own lives. And our faith,
our confidence, our devotion only deepens because it's based on our experience and our knowledge
and our practice increasing. So here with our practice, we have Guru Padmasambhava,
who is the precious root teacher of all Tibetan Buddhism, who really helped, along with King
Trisandetsen, Shantrakshita, and so many other great ones in the eighth century, helped establish
the Buddha's teachings in Tibet. So this living Buddha is what we're kind of keeping at the
forefront of our visualization and feeling in our presence right now with our practice,
when we're doing refuge. And of course, there's all the other aspects of the visualization,
but the essence is Guru Padmasambhava is here, a Vajra guru. And again, a Vajra, someone Phyllis
is asking, Vajra, essentially a Sanskrit word, and then Tibet and so Dorje, but the essence of
the meaning of Vajra is indestructible. So indestructible, unshakeable, you know, why?
Because all ignorance is gone. To be a Buddha means one's innate nature is fully developed,
and all misunderstanding is completely gone. So that means in union with just how things are,
which can never be shaken, and is also shiny, brilliant, with love, with compassion,
with skillful means to tickle all of our minds and hearts into awakening through all kinds of
different means. All the Buddhas of the three times, like we've heard, all had teachers.
And it said too, right, that out of all the Buddhas of the three times,
past, present, future, of this fortunate Aeon, of past ones, of future ones, the most kind
are the teachers that arrive in our own lives, who of course are carrying the lineage of teachings
and realization of the Buddha. And so we shouldn't be confused when we have Guru Patmasambhava
before
us, who is the embodiment of all the Buddhas of the three times, who helped bring the teachings
to our life, being inseparable from the living, precious teachers of our lives, who appear in
many ways. But that's really, there's no contradiction. There's that great unity.
The teachers of this life, who bring so beautifully, like Kim Pose Wong Rinpoche,
that help us to hear and put the teachings to practice in this very life right now,
is precious and inseparable. So we're keeping the presence of our beautiful teacher with us
when we're doing our refuge. And again, we're doing that in our formal session,
but also as much as we can, bringing to our mind and heart, outside of our formal session,
the presence of our teachers, their blessings, opening our mind and heart to that.
Because essentially, we're really trying to keep that purity view
that the teacher is all-pervading, the Buddhas are all-pervading,
their blessings are all-pervading. Everything appearing is the mandala of their enlightened
activity, to do what? Reaching out and nurturing us. Like Rinpoche has said,
the conditions for our enlightenment are the three jewels. So remembering, there's no separations
between our formal practice and our informal practice of going about things we do outside of
our getting off of our cushion and working in the world. As much as we can, keeping the atmosphere
of our practice and the teachings in our heart, and foremost, what embodies all of the teachings
and all the practices. The practices being realized are keeping our teacher in our mind and heart,
keeping them, you know, like they say, above our head, and the lotus thrown above our head.
Because just like the three jewels, the Buddha, the Dharma, the Sangha, are the conditions
for bringing the cause of our enlightenment to fruition. What is the cause of our enlightenment?
Is our Buddha nature, which is, you know, our very essence.
So our Buddha nature, we simply haven't discovered fully yet. We're beginning to bring out some of
the its beautiful qualities and relax and let them flow and beginning to remove our emotional
obscurations and our knowledge obscurations. And letting that come and increasing our bodhicitta
being able to stabilize our bodhicitta and practice our bodhicitta to just bring that fuller and
fuller.
So we're having confidence and devotion to those who've totally realized the teachings and realized
the truth that their own Buddha nature, who are in the full flower, the full fruit of complete
omniscience, of knowing how things are exactly as a Buddha, both on the ultimate level as well as a
relative truth. Like it's kind of inconceivable to us, but it's good to begin to imagine what omnis
cience
is like. And the Buddha's compassion, Guru Padmasambhava's compassion, our teacher's compassion,
is without limit. Completely impartial, equally loving, every single being, knowing each one of
us exactly as we are and giving us everything we need. All we need to do is open our mind and heart
to those kind of ceaseless, that ceaseless compassion that's not going to discriminate from
anyone, anytime, anywhere, given freely, equally, naturally, unimpededly, pervading
all of our experience. And that includes us, because when we're doing our practice,
we are keeping all beings in mind, but what makes we're working with our own mind and our own heart
to realize our own mind and heart's beautiful nature and qualities. So that's the other part
of when we're taking refuge, we're having more and more confidence in our own, you know, the
thought
of the fact that we actually could be enlightened. And having the motivation for that being to
bring
peace and happiness for everyone, everywhere, throughout all time, like beyond the limited little,
you know, mite in the fur of the mouse in the grass of maybe at least my current experience,
you know, to like that full, beautiful, pure, huge vista. That is like even when we start to
move through the boomies, not to mention full Buddhahood. So like there's that confidence in
the fully awakened ones, and also that confidence in our own possibility and potential, that that
can be awakened. And then through our practice, we're awakening to be an object of refuge.
So
let's just think about that for a moment.
And another aspect of that, again, I know I'm not saying anything new,
but is again remembering Guru Padmasambhava, Buddha Shakyamuni. They aren't merely stories.
They aren't. They have deep history and have touched this earth profoundly.
But they are Buddhas. They are not limited by time or space. So that means to say they're
living Buddhas, living Sangha, whose teachings remain in this world. And the more we open our
mind and heart to that, the more those teachings can come many ways, and blessings can come many
ways. And our bodhicitta can catch every drop of every experience we have towards benefiting
ourselves and others. So just remembering, we have a precious human teacher in this life.
And we have the living presence of Guru Padmasambhava, of Buddha Shakyamuni, of Yashisoja,
all the great masters. But to kind of give our minds something to focus on, we're always going
to have that all be embodied as Guru Padmasambhava before us. And just like Guru Padmasambhava said
so many times, as well as in many sutras of the Buddha, just thinking of the Buddha,
just thinking of Guru Padmasambhava with some degree of devotion and love and closeness feeling,
they're there. Again, the blessings of the Buddhas are limitless.
We only have to open our hearts.
Devotion is the door to receiving the blessings. The hook to catch the hook of compassion
is through our own open mind and open heart and open inquiry and trust.
And then of course, there's many levels of Buddha. If we're just going to look at Buddha
within the Three Jewels, there's the outer Buddha in a way. We could think of Buddha Shakyamuni,
who is the historical Buddha of this historical period of time, who brought all the teachings of
the Buddha, no matter what tradition, into this world. I'll go back to this one great kindness
teacher and this profoundly courageous loving being who attained enlightenment in this world
about 2,600 years ago and gave a great message of peace that spread throughout Asia and throughout
all the world, came to Tibet in the eighth century and was established there by Guru Padmasambhava
and many other great masters. And through all of those peoples, joy, devotion, courage, commitment,
we have those now in this world. So that living lineage goes all the way back. And of course,
Rinpoche's have some really great book, Walking in the Footsteps of the Buddha.
They have a commentary on the Buddha Sadhana. So just looking at the life stories of the Buddha,
as well as Guru Padmasambhava or any of the great masters, is so good at least that looking at
that outer level of a Buddha, of a fully awakened one. And again, the Buddha Dharmasanga aren't
separate. The Buddha is also what is what we're ultimately taking refuges in, is the enlightened
mind, the realization of Guru Padmasambhava of the Buddha. That enlightened mind is in complete
union
with what we know as the three kyas, which again aren't three separate things. They're three
aspects
for us to begin to frame the inconceivable reality of things. So the Dharmakaya is being fully
stable
to just end at one with the vastness, unimpeded openness of mind.
So that within every Buddha is completely realized. And also completely in union with
the clarity, with the arising energy of that openness, vastness is the clarity of the Sambhogakaya,
the body of luxuries of the ceaselessly vivid display of that great open emptiness,
Sambhogakaya. And then nirmanakaya is how that appears for sentient beings who haven't fully
recognized, or even not recognized at all their nature, or on the path of recognizing it.
So for most sentient beings we know it's the nirmanakaya Buddhas that we can connect to.
Again, the nirmanakaya Buddhas aren't different than Sambhogakaya Buddhas or Dharmakaya Buddhas,
they're three aspects of Buddhahood. So nirmanakaya in a way, that's how we sentient
beings experience. And then as our realization increases, then we begin to witness the outer
Sambhogakaya Buddhas, Dharmakaya Buddhas. But what are they doing? The nirmanakaya Buddhas
are coming different ways too. There's what's called the supreme nirmanakaya Buddhas.
That would be like Guru Padmasambhava, Yeshisoja, Mandarava,
Buddha Shakyamuni, these great, great enlightened beings
who have appeared in this world, as an example of a supreme nirmanakaya.
Also, nirmanakaya comes in other aspects too, such as art. So like when we see the statues
of representations of the Buddhas, mind, body, speech,
the books of the teachings, statues, the sounds of hearing the teachings,
that's another aspect of nirmanakaya Buddha. And then also all kinds of varied ways nirmanakayas
appear as medicine, as circumstances that bring protection and peace and balance to beings.
So in a way, we're getting back to how there's no separation. The more we open our minds and
hearts to the all-pervading enlightened activity of our Guru, then the more
we're experiencing and benefiting from the nirmanakaya Buddhas.
So that's on the level of, and to do what? To recognize our own dharmakaya, our own sambhogakaya,
our own nirmanakaya. And the essence of that is just what we can do in every practice.
Look to our mind.
Just let our awareness rest.
Investigate our mind as we do according to the instructions. Where is it? What does it look like?
How does it sound? Can we find it? What shape is it? All the different methods the Buddha gave
us to investigate the nature of our mind. And of course, no one's found their mind, not even the
Buddha. But the point here is that very aspect of what's in our practice, with every practice,
whether we're chanting or in a silent meditation, letting our mind rest in that openness,
we're connecting with our own dharmakaya. And then inseparable from that openness,
that vastness, that unfindability is just the clarity of our awareness, the arising
energy of our awareness, which as we settle more and more and more and are able to be less and less
distracted, and see more and more that the emptiness of everything that's appearing, then the
purity of
that sambhogakaya clarity of our own mind becomes more apparent. And in the meantime, that all
pervading compassion of our mind, that's uncompounded, that's uncreated, that's ceaselessly
arising, is our every part of our experience, no matter how muddled it is, or how pristine and
unobscured it is, is one another way of connecting with our trust in our own experience,
that's open to the blessings of receiving the blessings from those who've recognized it.
And so then on the Vajrayana level, there's another aspect we've all heard about
of these three jewels, the Buddha, Dharma, Sangha. You know, there's the what's known,
we all have heard the three roots, that again, Guru Padmasambhava embodies.
The Guru, the Yidam, or the Deva, the Dakini, or the Khandro. So Guru, Deva, Dakini,
are the three roots. The Guru is the source of all blessings, the fully enlightened mind,
the source of all blessings, full of compassion. That's completely impartial, all-pervading,
and very, very skillful in display. So the root, the source of all realization is the Yidam,
or the deity. The source of all enlightened activity is the Dakini,
and the Dharma Palas. And the way those can correlate with the three jewels are,
you know, the Guru is the Buddha, the Yidams, the Devas, the deities are the Dharma,
and the realization of that is the Dharma. And then all the Dakinis and Dharma Palas,
all enlightened activity is the Sangha. And again, there's no separation.
As much as we can bring that into our form or practice, just recognizing that, connecting,
in whatever ways we can with that, is helpful. And there's no separation. As much as we can
kind of just remember that, gently, gently, gently, again, come back again, and again,
and again, to just touching base with our motivation, and keeping the view that we've
been introduced in the teachings, and try to remember the instructions that we were taking
to heart, and have our activities kind of follow in line through the support of our mindfulness,
to bring that in. So I should probably stop talking, and we continue again, our ongoing
conversations and reflections. So we'll just sit for a couple moments, and then we'll begin our
formal nundra practice, which, of course, you're welcome to join, if you'd like.
So we'll just relax for a few moments, and then we'll begin. And again, we're going to be using
this nundra practice. And we'll start with a few, again, lineage prayers,
feeling, keeping, again, Guru Rinpoche, Guru Patma Sambhava, as the main focus for all the
all-pervading.